So I've shown examples of code
with initializer blocks in the last video.
The first example demonstrated the order of statements
and the second demonstrated the use of local variables
in the blocks and variable initialization statements.
In that example, we were well behaved,
and never tried to use a variable before
we declared it and always referenced it
with the this keyboard modifier.
But let's see what happens if we relax that discipline.
The exam may present sample code
that expects you to be knowledgeable of something
called forward variable declarations.
Let's turn to our Objects project,
gonna create a new class here.
We'll call this one ForwardReference.
All right, there's a sample code.
The code's set up as follows.
We're creating a package level class called Thing,
which has got a constructor.
Also an initializer block,
which you can see on screen there,
and a static initializer block as well.
In addition, Thing has two instance variables
and a static variable
and we're implementing the toString method.
Now, the main method of the class,
ForwardReference in this class,
instantiates an object of type Thing
and prints it to the console.
So if we run this now,
no surprises here.
We're setting variables, both static and instance variables,
to String literals in the initializer blocks.
And of course, as well as storing that in the constructor.
All right, next what we're gonna do though
is change the constructors and initializer code.
What we'll do is specifically,
first inside the constructor.
Gonna come up here and instead of secondString equals B,
I'm gonna add some code to the end of that
plus thirdString.
Then in the initializer down here on line 19,
I'm going to do the same thing.
So I'm going to do a plus thirdString.
Then in the static initializer,
instead of just having the assignment in there,
I'm going to actually print out the thirdString.
But noting where I'm actually printing it out.
So thirdString.
You can see straight away by doing this,
I've introduced a compile error
in the static initializer block.
And hovering over it, illegal forward reference.
You might remember that I stated in the previous video
that a static initializer cannot use a static variable
to clear below whatever statement
other than an initialization statement.
So this includes the System.out.printIn statement
that we're using here.
This generates an illegal forward reference compiler error
as you can see on screen.
Now you will note that the constructor
and the initializer code are fine
because thirdString is a static variable
and will always be available
to any instances in its initializer blocks.
So let's just comment out that compile error below, line 24.
All right, so let's see what happens now that
in the initializer block,
we changed the static firstString reference
to an instance variable secondString.
So I'm gonna come up there and change that to secondString.
So we hover over that.
Same error.
We've got illegal forward reference.
So again, I've introduced the compile error.
This time in a legal forward reference
compile area in the initializer block.
So this again verifies that you cannot
reference an instance variable,
which is declared further on in the code
in an initializer block.
So I'll comment that out as well.
Actually, what I'll do in this case,
I'll just undo that go back to what we had before
which was thirdString, which was working just fine.
This time, what I'm gonna do is change the constructor
to concatenate secondStting to B
and reassign the value to secondString.
Let's see what happens when I do that.
So I change this in the constructor to second,
leaving the initializer
and the static initializer as they are.
This time you can say we haven't got an error.
The code compiles and if I run this now,
we get acbnullc as the output.
So let's just try one more example here.
Gonna change the initializer statement.
firstString equals secondString.
That looks like a pretty simple initialization statement,
but you can see that it's failing as well.
Same error, illegal forward reference.
And that's because second string cannot be fully resolved
by the compiler at the time this initializer is called.
It's the compiler error they're actually getting.
Now, we can get around that
by using this, so this dot,
you can see the error is noticed up here
and we can run this
and the code works.
So that may have been a bit unexpected.
Let's go through why that's the case.
When you execute initializer blocks and constructor methods,
you are in a state of not quite fully initialised.
Initialization occurs in these steps.
One, the JVM checks which class has been initialised.
If the class hasn't been initialised,
JVM loads and initialises the class.
The Java Virtual Machine allocates memory to house data
for the new instance.
Third, the JVM initialises instance variables
to the default values.
And four, the JVM executes custom initialization code
found in assignment declarations of instance variables,
initializer blocks in constructor or constructors.
The compiler will not qualify variables
with this implicitly until after
it has evaluated all the initialization steps.
Generally, it's considered an error
to try and access an instance variable
you haven't yet declared in initialised code
and the error is a useful red flag.
Now, if for some reason, you want to force the issue,
and you really do mean to just use the default value
assigned in step three,
you can do this with the this qualifier.
We saw that working in our code.
All right, so moving on,
in previous videos, we states initializer blocks
are executed prior to the constructor block
of code being executed.
This is actually a statement that needs
to be clarified a little bit.
If your constructor called the super constructor,
manually or implied, the initializer code is executed
after this statement and prior to any other statements
in your constructor.
I think an example would serve well here.
Instead of Objects project,
gonna create a new class.
We'll call this one InitializerOddsAndEnds.
All right, so this code has a class,
a super class which is a constructor
as you can see there, which simply prints out
the statement to the console.
Middle going down, we've got another class here.
A subclass that extends a superclass.
This class has got an initializer block.
Initializer code, you can see down there on the screen.
It's a got a simple parameter constructor which we can see
and that constructor explicit calls the parent constructor
with super, and this class is known
as a no arguments constructor.
See that on line 27.
Now, the InitializerOddsAndEnds class,
instantiates an object.
You can see that on the bottom there.
Up top, ASubClass passing constructor a name.
All right, so if we run this code,
you can see that output as follows.
So specifically, this code's demonstrating
that the parent constructor called by super,
there's the original superclass
and there's the,
you scroll down, there's the super call on line 34.
So the parent constructor called by supra
is executed before the child initializer blocks
which were inserted before the other statements
in a child constructor code
and you can see that's confirmed
in the output down the bottom.
So if we go ahead and make a change here
and change super on line 34 in a subclass constructor,
change that to this, execute the code.
So this looks similar to what we saw previously,
except now we've got a statement
from the no args constructor.
So we can see from this that the call to this
was executed now after the initializer block.
So a call to super was implied
and doesn't need to be called explicitly.
It's still a code before the initializer block, though.
Now I talked more about this
earlier in the course on inheritance.
But just something to keep in mind.
All right, so coming up, we've got some quiz questions
which review what we've talked about
in this second of the course.
Good luck with that,
and I'll catch up with you after that.